# ACO-CSP

Solving the Closest String Problem using Ant Colony Optimization.
Project for the course (Swarm Intelligence)[http://cs.ulb.ac.be/public/teaching/infoh414] implemented by _Jens Nevens_.

## What is included?

The following items are included in this project:

- **/src**: This folder contains the source code of the ACO implementations
- **/data**: This folder contains the instance files
- **/output**: This folder contains output generated by the ACO code and by Python/R scripts
- **/report**: This folder contains the report
- **/scripts**: This folder contains the Python and R scripts used for analysis
- **misc**: Other files include this README, and 2 bash scripts used to run the ACO code on all instances for 10 trials

## How to run the code?

We assume the executable is called `ACO-CSP`. The executable accepts the following parameters:

- `[--as | --mmas | --acs]`. A flag to indicate the algorithm to use.
- `--local`. A flag to indicate whether to use the local search procedure (optional). Default: off.
- `--ants N`. Specify the number of ants (integer). Default: 10.
- `--alpha F`. Specify a value for `alpha` (float). Default: 1.0.
- `--beta F`. Specify a value for `beta` (float). Default: 1.0.
- `--rho F`. Specify a value for `rho` (float). Default: 0.1.
- `--brep F`. Specify a value for `brep` (float). Only useful when `--local` is turned on. Default: 0.001.
- `--q0 F`. Specify a value for `q0` (float). Only useful when `--acs` is turned on. Default: 0.9.
- `--budget N`. Specify an evaluation budget (integer). Default: 1000.
- `--seed N`. Specify a random seed (integer).
- `--instance FILE`. Specify the path to an instance file (filepath).
- `--v`. Flag to indicate verbosity. If turned out, the algorithm will print more information. Default: off.

This code has been implemented on macOS. However, it was also successfully build and tested on Linux, using `g++`.

## Output data

The **/output** folder contains a lot of data. Here is an overview.

In **/output/algorithms**, you can find all the data comparing AS to MMAS and ACS. This folder contains `.txt` files for each instance showing the solution quality of 10 trials. This folder also contains `.csv` files. In the files `algorithm-name-results.csv`, you can find the best, worst, mean and std for all algorithms on all instances. In the files `algorithm-name-rpd.csv`, you can find the relative percentage deviations for all algorithms on all instances.

Next, we have **/output/algorithms/plots**. This folder contains boxplots and convergence plots for all instances.

Similarly, we have **/output/algorithms/stats**, which contains the results of the Wilcoxon rank sum test for all instances.

Finally, we have **/output/algorithms/convergence**. This folder contains a subfolder for every instance. Here, you can find the raw output of the ACO implementations.

The folder **/output/localsearch** is build in exactly the same structure. However, instead of comparing AS - MMAS - ACS, we now compare MMAS - MMAS+LS - MMAS+LS+.
